hello everyone so today we are going to
do Sutra
1.7 now in the last
Sutra we understood that there were five
types of vuis right so we are going to
go into the first type of vuti which is
Prana now we mentioned that
Prana was right knowledge so what
exactly is Right knowledge when we
perceive something correctly what are
the types or ways of right knowledge so
first Sutra 1.7
States
prani
so the pranas are or right knowledge
isum
so praka is sense
perception sense P perception so sense
perception is when the
senses the five senses contact the sense
objects that is when your eyes see
something right when you're when you
hear something when you feel something
but what it is is it's a very
complicated process what exactly happens
is the eyeball or in this case the the
sense organ that they would say contexts
what's in front of you or whatever
you're about to see that information
then subsequently goes through the sense
channel into the mind and the mind then
kind of transfers it to the purusha the
witness The Observer so there's a
process and we'll go through that
process but it's very important to
understand that sense perception it's
like you know it it seems easy like okay
you know I'm just seeing something but
it's it's an actual process according to
the yoga Sutra and uh Vasa and the
different commentators and they they'll
go into how the exact objects are
perceived and so the sense organs act as
channels
and these channels then subsequently
relay the information that's perceived
into the mind and the mind then kind of
if it's a pure mind a pure buddie a pure
intellect which we'll go into later will
kind of reflect it kind of pass it on to
the to the soul or to the witness to The
Observer and then that itself The
Observer will witness
it but either way the witness is
observing everything anyway so sense
perception
is the first is the first form of right
knowledge the second form of right
knowledge is
inference
inference what is inference so inference
is when we come to a conclusion about
something by using some sort of
indicator now what does this mean so if
I'm walking on a mountain right and you
know I'm enjoying the scenery and
there's a you know birds and whatever
you know plants and whatever is on a
mountain and I'm enjoying the scenery
I'm enjoying the scent and uh the
experience itself and then I look over
to my right side and I see smoke rising
from the hill of the
mountain then seeing that smoke which is
an indicator I can then come to some
sort of an inference a conclusion that
there's going to there's a fire nearby
there seems to be a fire nearby so I am
using the smoke as an indicator to see
that there's fire nearby or even for
example let's say I have a best friend
and wherever I go I'm with that best
friend all the time no matter what which
is kind of odd but let's say no matter
what I was always there with that best
friend all the time then if someone were
to walk into a room and they were to see
me then they would be reasonably right
to assume that my best friend is also
going to be there that's inference
wherever there is wherever there's smoke
there's
fire so that's one that's the second
form of right knowledge the third form
of right knowledge is
scripture scripture or verbal
testimony verbal
testimony the yoga Sutra states that the
third form of knowledge is through
scripture so in in these Indian
philosophical traditions it's very
common to be very you know uh you know
devotional and to be very uh respectful
towards scripture often times scriptures
are seen as an authority of knowledge so
many practitioners will see the
scripture as you know a form of
knowledge like that's what it is so aama
scripture or verbal testimony When
someone tells you something but it's not
just anybody there's qualifications and
we'll see someone who is very who has
experienced it who wants to convey it in
a truthful manner so that's one way of
coming to a form of knowledge so let's
break this down what are the three ways
that I can attain right knowledge one
way is through my senses contacting the
sense objects when I see something when
I hear something when I feel something
when I taste something
right then the other way is through
inference and inference is by when I use
an indicator of something to determine a
conclusion for something and the last
way is verbal testimony so if we use the
mountain example I can see the fire
right through sense
perception I can use inference to in see
the smoke and say that there's fire or I
can hear let's say someone's walking
down there and let's say it's like a
firefighter right and the firefighter is
like there's a fire up there well based
on that person's
Authority and you know we can assume in
some way that they tell the truth we can
tell it there's a fire there so these
are three ways that according to yoga uh
one attains uh knowledge and the thing
is that one may now
ask can can't these be wrong can't
somebody lie or can't you infer
something incorrectly or can't can't
your senses be mistaken in fact these
things are true and this doubt is
definitely raised but see we'll
understand that the nature of a Prana
the nature of a a uh
of of right knowledge is never wrong see
the fundamental basis of a Prana of
right knowledge is that it always leads
you to the truth so if you perceive
something but it's not actually correct
that's not a Prana so Prana is always
correct so if you hear something and
it's not correct that's not a Prana
that's not that's not right knowledge so
right knowledge the assumption is
already that is it's correct so assume
like it's like a box and anything that
goes through this Bo box has to be
correct so I'll explain this later but
uh for now just
remember the pranas
ofum and a thank